---
id: logical-rust
aliases:
tags:
  - post
title: "Logical Rust: An Exercise in Type Safety"
index: 2
published: false
---

## Introduction

Lately I've been working on a simple compiler, just to get a better sense of how they work. As part of that, I wanted to implement a way of generating unique ids that I could then use later as keys/hashes for other things. Here's the rough idea of what I came up with:

```rust
#[derive(Debug, PartialEq, Eq, Hash, Copy, Clone)]
pub struct Id
{
    id: usize,
}

impl Id
{
    pub fn new() -> Id
    {
        //...
    }
}
```

The idea here is pretty simple. We can create new unique ids trivially and assign them to variables:

```rust
let a = Id::new();
let b = Id::new();
let c = a;

assert_ne!(a, b);
assert_ne!(b, c);
assert_eq!(a, c);
```

Then we can use these ids as "labels". Maybe we have some sort of graph or tree set up:

```rust
let state_one = Id::new();
let state_two = Id::new();
let transition = Transition::new(state_one, state_two);
```

This system has a few nice properties. We can define our variables beforehand etc. etc.


The most obvious solution to this is to use a static variable as a counter that increments every time a new ID is created.

```rust
impl Id
{
    pub fn new() -> Id
    {
        static COUNTER: usize = 0;
        let id = COUNTER;
        COUNTER += 1;
        Id 
        {
            id,
        }
    }
}
```

This, of course, does not work because `COUNTER` is declared as immutable. Fixing it is not as easy as adding `mut` to the static variable, however. Rust does not allow you to read or write a mutable static variable without doing so inside an unsafe block[^1]. The reasons should be obvious: This code would be subject to race conditions if `Id's` were able to be generated across multiple threads. We can either use an unsafe block here or we can preemptively take advantage of Rust's build in atomic types to give us safe multithreading. Even though we may not plan on adding multithreading, let's follow best practices here.

```rust
impl Id
{
    pub fn new() -> Id
    {
        static COUNTER: AtomicUsize = AtomicUsize::new(0);
        let id = COUNTER.fetch_add(1, Ordering::Relaxed);
        Id
        {
            id,
        }
    }
}
```

This works because even though the static variable `COUNTER` is immutable, [AtomicUsize](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/sync/atomic/struct.AtomicUsize.html) uses *interior mutability* to override the compiler's checks, while essentially "pinky-promising" with us, the user, that it will do so in a way that is safe.

However, there were a few things still bugging me about this implementation.

For most programmers, a static variable is considered bad practice. Static variables are difficult to track and reason about. They essentially exist in a hazy, half-conceptualized state outside of the flow of execution of the program.If at all possible, we would like our static counter to be in a place in memory and in reasoning that we can keep track of.

So what if we implement some sort of `IdGenerator`? A data type that holds the counter and uses it to produce an Id?

```rust
pub struct IdGenerator
{
    counter: usize,
}

impl IdGenerator
{
    pub fn id(&mut self) -> Id
    {
        let id = self.counter;
        self.counter += 1;
        Id
        {
            id,
        }
    }
}
```

This also works just fine. However, there's one thing that bugs me about this implementation. If we create two `IdGenerator`s and compare the `Id`s produced by them, these different `Id`s will appear to be equal.
```rust
let mut id_generator_1 = IdGenerator::new();
let mut id_generator_2 = IdGenerator::new();
let id_1 = id_generator_1.id();
let id_2 = id_generator_2.id();

// Fails! Both ids have an id of 1!
assert_ne!(id_1, id_2)
```

Obviously we would like ids generated by different generators to not equal each other. What would be even better is if we just couldn't even try to compare `Id`s from different generators in the first place.
See, now we arguably have two methods of inequality. Two ids could not equal each other because their underlying serial is different, but they could also not equal each other because they are from different generators. We're comparing apples to oranges.

There's a few ways we could handle this logical quirk. One is to abandon implementing traditional equality and instead return an `Option<bool>`. This return type tells us that there are scenarios where a true or false value is meaningless. In this case, because we tried to compare two things not actually equatable. 

But wouldn't it be nice if we could just stop Rust and ourselves from comparing them entirely?

Anytime we're asking how to do something in compile time, types are an immediate first attempt.

```rust
pub struct Id<T>
{
    id: usize,
}
```

Of course, Rust does not let us use a type `T` without it being present in the body of the struct[^2]. But Rust does provide us [PhantomData](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nomicon/phantom-data.html) for this exact situation.

```rust
pub struct Id<T>
{
    id: usize,
    _marker: PhantomData<T>,
}
```

Then we can implement equality like so:

```rust
impl<T> PartialEq for Id<T>
{
    fn eq(&self, other: &Self) -> bool
    {
        self.id == other.id
    }
}
```


It's worth noting here that [PartialEq](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/cmp/trait.PartialEq.html) does let us implement `eq` between two different types. But in this case, we only want to allow equality between two ids with the *exact* same type. We can't compare `Id<A>` to `Id<B>`. What is `A` and `B`? Quite literally anything we want. We can use any type because we haven't specified any bounds on `T`.

Even though we can use any type, realistically we probably want to use types that are semantically related to the generator in which we are creating them for. 
```rust
struct A;
// id_generator is an IdGenerator<A>
let id_generator = IdGenerator::<A>::new();
// id is an Id<A>
let id = id_generator.id();
```

One restriction of this is that it's kind of annoying to have to create a new type every time we want to use an `IdGenerator`. In addition, nothing is stopping us from doing this:
```rust
struct A;
let id_generator_1 = IdGenerator::<A>::new();
let id_generator_2 = IdGenerator::<A>::new();
let id_1 = id_generator_1.new();
let id_2 = id_generator_2.new();
// Fails!
assert_ne!(id_1, id_2);
```

One neat trick we can do is make our brand types locally scoped. We can do this:

```rust
let id_generator = {
    struct A;
    IdGenerator::<A>::new()
};
```
`id_generator` has a type of `IdGenerator<A>` but `A` is defined only within our artifical scope we made. We can still use the `id_generator` even though we don't have access to `A`.

But if we do it again:

```
let id_generator = {
    struct A;
    IdGenerator::<A>::new()
};
let id_generator_2 = {
    struct A;
    IdGenerator::<A>::new()
};
```
`A` actually represents two completely different types! Even though they're named the same, their declaration is completely different and unrelated to each other. 

This works, right? This gives us everything we wanted. We can even wrap this little formula up in a nice little macro so all users have to do is call `id_generator!()` or something.

Well, there's one pretty big limiation of this. 

We can't *store* an `id_generator` declaratively anywhere. In the body of a function, variable types are allowed to be anonymous and untyped. Rust will determine it automatically. But we can't do that with struct members. We *have* to define all members of a struct.

```rust
pub struct ThingThatHasAnIdGenerator
{
    id_generator: IdGenerator<?>
}
```

We can't just discard it either with `<_>` since Rust needs to know the size of an `IdGenerator`. It'd be nice if we could just tell Rust that a generic type is always going to be unsized and we don't need to account for it when figuring out `ThingThatHasAnIdGenerator`, but as far as I'm aware, this doesn't exist.

Fine, we'll go back on our static, compile time `IdGenerator`s. It makes sense, after all, that we might not *know* ahead of time whether two `IdGenerator`s will be equal. Instead, we'll just add additional metadata to an `Id` that tells us what generator it came from.

My first thought for this is can we use the address of the generating `IdGenerator`?

Well, kinda.

(Okay so I'll write this all down later but what this basically looks like is:)

- We can't store a reference to the `IdGenerator` while still mutating the `IdGenerator`.
- We can't store the hard-coded address of an `IdGenerator` while also ensuring that it stays in scope/doesn't move.
- AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA


[^1]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/items/static-items.html#mutable-statics
[^2]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/0738-variance.html#the-corner-case-unused-parameters-and-parameters-that-are-only-used-unsafely


